# Counting II 10.3

## **<ins>Inclusion-exclusion principle:</ins>** 

Define the set ð‘† to be the set of all seniors. Define ð» to be the set of students on the honor roll. The high school wants to count the number of students in the set ð‘† âˆª ð». The principle of inclusion-exclusion is a technique for determining the cardinality of the union of sets that uses the cardinality of each individual set and the cardinality of the intersections of the sets. 


## The inclusion-exclusion principle with two sets.

$$
|A \cup B| = |A| + |B| - |A \cap B|
$$

### Reminder: âˆ© = Intersection âˆª = Union

Let ð´ and ðµ be two finite sets, then |ð´ âˆª ðµ|=|ð´|+|ðµ|âˆ’|ð´ âˆ© ðµ|. (All elements from each set without duplicates).

1. A group contains 10 women, 8 left-handed people, and 3 left-handed women. How many people are either left-handed or a woman?

> Let A be the set of women -> |A|  = 10
>
> Let B be the set of left handed people |B| = 8
>
> Intersection: | A U B | = 3
>
> Apply formula
>
> 10 + 8 - 3 = 15.

2. Erica goes swimming three out of seven days of the week. How many possibilities are there for her swim schedule if Erica goes swimming on Monday or Tuesday or both? (Define ð‘€ to be the set of schedules in which Erica goes swimming on Monday. Let ð‘‡ be the set of schedules in which Erica goes swimming on Tuesday. Determine the numerical value of |ð‘€ âˆª ð‘‡|.)

> Three out of seven days a week = 7! / 3!(4!) = 35 possible combinations
>
> If Monday is included, then we need 2 more days from the remaining 6
>
> |M| = (6 2) = 15
>
> |T| = (6 2) = 15
>
> If both Monday and Tuesday are included, then we need 1 more day from the remaining 5:
>
> |M U T| = (5 1) = 5
>
> Apply formula
>
> |M| + |T| - |M U T|
>
> 15 + 15 - 5 = 25

3. How many positive integers less than 100 have at least one digit that is a 9? (Let ð‘‡ be the set of positive integers less than 100 with a 9 in the ten's place. Let ð‘‚
 be the set of positive integers less than 100 with a 9 in the one's place. Now determine the numerical value of |ð‘‡ âˆª ð‘‚|)

 > |T| = 10
 >
 > |O| = 10
 >
 > |T U O| = |T| + |O| - |A âˆ© B|
 >
 > |T U O| = 10 + 10 - 1 = 19

 
 ## The Inclusion-exclusion principle with three sets

$$
|A \cup B \cup C| = |A| + |B| + |C| - |A \cap B| - |A \cap C| - |B \cap C| + |A \cap B \cap C|
$$

1. U count every element in a b and c. 

2. Elements in intercections are counted multiple times. 

3. Then we subtract each elements that belong to two pairs because they were counted twice.

4. Elements in all three sets were counted three times in step 1 and subtracted three times in step 2 so they were removed completly so we add them back.

## Look at example 10.3.3 with ven diagram























