# Sequences 11.1

## **<ins>Sequence:</ins>** 

Is a special type of function in which the domain is a set of consecutive integers.

## Ex: The function ğ‘” is specified by the numerical values for the GPA in each year: 

ğ‘”â¡(1)=3.67,  ğ‘”â¡(2)=2.88,  ğ‘”â¡(3)=3.25,  ğ‘”â¡(4)=3.75


## When a function is specified as a sequence, using subscripts to denote the input to the function is more common, so ğ‘”<sub>ğ‘˜</sub> is used instead of ğ‘”â¡(ğ‘˜). A value ğ‘”<sub>ğ‘˜</sub> is called a term of a sequence, and ğ‘˜ is the index of ğ‘”<sub>ğ‘˜</sub>. 

The sequence is written:
ğ‘”<sub>1</sub> = 3.67,  ğ‘”<sub>2</sub> = 2.88,  ğ‘”<sub>3</sub> = 3.25,  ğ‘”<sub>4/sub> = 3.75

The entire sequence is denoted by {ğ‘”<sub>k</sub>} whereas ğ‘”<sub>k</sub> (without the curly braces) is used to denote a single term in the sequence. While the first index is commonly 0 or 1, a sequence may start with any integer:

## <ins>Geometric sequence:</ins> 

is a sequence of real numbers where each term after the initial term is found by taking the previous term and multiplying by a fixed number called the common ratio. A geometric sequence can be finite or infinite.

## <ins>Arithmetic sequence:</ins> 

is a sequence of real numbers where each term after the initial term is found by taking the previous term and adding a fixed number called the common difference. An arithmetic sequence can be finite or infinite.

## <ins>Recurrence relation</ins>

 Some sequences are most naturally defined by specifying one or more initial terms and then giving a rule for determining subsequent terms from earlier terms in the sequence. A rule that defines a term a<sub>n</sub> as a function of previous terms in the sequence is called a recurrence relation. For example, in an arithmetic sequence, each number is obtained by adding a fixed value to the previous number.

 The Fibonacci sequence also arises naturally in computer science in analyzing certain data structures and algorithms for data search. Recurrence relations are used to describe phenomena in many diverse areas of business, engineering, and science. Recurrence relations are especially useful in computer science for modeling the running time of recursive algorithms.

## <ins>Dynamical System</ins>

 A dynamical system is a system that changes over time. Moreover, the state of the system at any point in time is determined by a set of well-defined rules that depend on the past states of the system.  




















