# Direct Proofs 6.4

## **<ins>Direct Proof:</ins>**

## Many mathmatical theorms take the conditional form expressed as p → c, where p is the proposition that asserts that a set of hypothesis is true and c is the conclusion. Sometimes p is refered to the hypothesis for simplicity.

Ex:

> 1. For every interger n, if n is odd then n<sup>2</sup> is odd. Which is equavalent to ∀n (D(n) → D(n<sup>2</sup>).
> (Universal quantifier is at the start)
> 2. If n is an odd integer, then n<sup>2</sup> is an odd integer.
>(Universal quantifier is at the end)
> 3. The square of every odd integer is also odd
>
> (Theses are all in implication form)

# Steps

1. Assume the hypothesis is true. State varibles and assumptions. 

2. State what will be proven. For direct proof you proove that the hypothesis is equal to the conclusion. 

3. Proove Conclusion

# Problems:

1. Theorem: The difference between two even integers is even.

   Proof:

   Let x and y be even integers. We shall prove that the difference between x and y is even.

   Since x is even then x = 2k for some integer k. Since y is even then y = 2j for some integer j.

   Let z be a even number, such that z = x - y.

   Substituting for x any y we get z = 2k - 2j.

   Factor out a 2 and we get z = 2(k - j).

   Since z = 2 (k - j) Since the difference of k - j is also a integer then x-y is even.

   QED.

2. Theorem: If x is a real number and x - 3 = 0, then x<sup>2</sup> - 2x - 3 = 0.

   Proof:

   Assume x is a real number and x - 3 = 0. We shall proove that x<sup>2</sup> - 2x - 3 = 0.

   Solving for the equation x - 3 = 0 we get x = 3.

   Substiting x = 3 we get (3)<sup>2</sup> - 2(3) - 3 = 9 - 6 - 3 = 0;

   Therefore when x - 3 = 0 is true then x<sup>2</sup> -2x - 3 is also true.

   QED.

# Definition of a rational number

   A number r is rational if r = p/q, where p,q ∈ Z and p does not equal 0

3. Theorem: The square of any rational number is also rational

   Proof: 

   Assume x is a rational number. We will prove that x<sup>2</sup> is also rational.

   Since x is a rational number than x = p / q, where p,q are integers and p does not equal 0.

   Pluging in for x we get (p / q)<sup>2</sup> = (p / q)<sup>2</sup> = p<sup>2</sup> / q<sup>2</sup>.

   Since p is a integer, p<sup>2</sup> is also a integer. Since q is a integer q<sup>2</sup> is a integer.
  
   Since x<sup>2</sup> = p<sup>2</sup> / q<sup>2</sup> where x<sup>2</sup> and y<sup>2</sup> are both integers, and q<sup>2</sup> does not equal zero 
   
   x<sup>2</sup> is a rational number.

   QED.


# Divisibility - x | y (x divides y with remainder = 0 or y = x * k where k is a integer.

4. Theorem: If x and y are integers and x | y, then x<sup>2</sup> | y<sup>2</sup>

   Assume x and y are integers such that x<sup>2</sup> | y<sup>2</sup>.

   Since x | y then y = x * k for some integer k.

   Squaring both sides we get y<sup>2</sup> = (x * k)<sup>2</sup>.

   y<sup>2</sup> = xk<sup>2</sup> = y<sup>2</sup> = x<sup>2</sup>k<sup>2</sup>

   Since k is a integer than k<sup>2</sup> is also a integer.

   Therefore y<sup>2</sup> is equal to x<sup>2</sup> times some integer k. 

   QED.

   














