# Big O Notation 7.2

## **<ins>Asymptotic growth:</ins>**

Let f be a function that maps positive integers to nonnegative real numbers. The function f is a meassure of how fast the output f(n) grows as the input n grows. Asymptotic notation is a useful tool for evaluating the efficiency of algorithms.

The classification of functions

1. **Big-O (O)**
    - Upper bound on growth rate (worst case).
    - Ex: f(n) = O(n^2) means f(n) grows no faster than n^2

2. **Big-Omega (Ω)**
    - Lower bound on growth rate (best case).
    - Ex: f(n) = Ω(n) means f(n) grows at least as fast as n

3. **Big-Theata (Θ)**
    - Tight bound (both upper and lower).
    - Ex: f(n) = Θ(n^2) means f(n) grows exactly like n^2 up to constant factors.

Asymtotic notation ignore small values for input n and constant factors in the functions. In the expressions 7n^3 and 5n^2, the 7 and 5 are constant factors because the values of 7 and 5 do not depend on the varible n.

## <ins>O notation</ins>

The expression f is O(g) is read "f is Oh of g" and means that the function f(n) is less than or equal to g(n), if constant factors are ommited and small values for n are ignored. If f is O(g), then there is a positive number c such that when f(n) and c x g(n) are graphed, the graph of c x g(n) eventually cross f(n) and remains higher than f(n) as n gets large.

<https://zytools.zybooks.com/zyAuthor/DiscreteMath/47/IMAGES/86b3eb39-3fd7-47fe-afaf-88f751f687ff>

**When we say something like f is O(g) we are saying f does not grow faster than g at a certain point.**

## (n) is O(g(n)) if there exist constants c > 0 and n0 ​≥ 0 such that: 0 ≤ f(n) ≤ c ⋅ g(n)for all n ≥ n0​

**What this means:**

- Beyond some point n0, the function f(n) grows no faster than g(n) up to a constant factor c.

- Big-O gives an upper bound on growth rate.

- It ignores constants and lower order terms because we care about asymptotic behavior has n approaches infiniti.

- n0 is the threshold point where the Big-O relationship starts to hold. You use n to proove that a algorithm dosent grow faster than a certain growth rate.

# Order of big O boundings

- O(1) Constant time

- O(log n) Logarithmic

- O(n) Linear

- O(n log n) Linearithmic

- O(n^2) - Quadratic

- O(n^3) - Qubic

- O(n^n) - Exponential

- O(n!) - Factorial

# Indicate weather the given facts imply f is O(g)

## 1. There is a integer n such that n >= 4 and f(n) <= 10 x g(n)

> Does not imply that f is O(g), it should hold for every n that is greater than a certain value.
> (n0 = 4)

## 2. For every integer n such that n >= 4, g(n) <= 10 x f(n)

> Does not imply that f is O(g) because it should be f(n) <= 10 x g(n).
> (n0 = 4)

## 3. For every integer n such that n >= -4, f(n) <= 10 x g(n).

> Implies that f is O(g).
> (n0 = -4)

## 4. For every integer n such that n >= 4, f(n) <= n x g(n).

> Does not imply f(n) <= c x g(n) c is a constant that does not depend on n
> (n0 = 4)

# <ins>Formal Definition of O(n):</ins>

** f(n) is O(g(n)) if there exists some constant c that is greater than zero and n0 such that f(n)
 <= c x g(n) for all n greater than or equal to n >0. ** 
