# Counting 9.3

## **<ins>The generialized product rule:</ins>**  This rule says that in selecting an item from a set, if the number of choices at each step does not depend on previous choices made, then the number of items in the set is the product of the number of choices in each step.

A race with 20 runners has a first place, a second place and a third place trophy. An outcome of the race is defined to be who wins each of the three trophies. How many outcomes are possible?

All 20 of the runners are eligible to win the first place trophy. Once the first place runner is determined, 19 possibilities remain for the second place trophy (since no one can place both first and second). Once the top two runners are determined, 18 possibilities remain for the third place trophy. The number of possibilities for the outcome of the race is.

> 20 x 19 x 18 = 6,840

Three employees work in a start-up. The employees rent an office space with eight offices, anticipating growth. The office space comes with four desks. Each employee can select an office and a desk. The selection is done in the order that the employees joined the company, with the founder going first. How many ways can the selection be done?

> (8 x 4) x (7 x 4) x (6 x 2) = 8064

In the following question, a club with ten students elects a president, vice president, secretary and treasurer. No student can hold more than one position.

> 10 x 9 x 8 x 7 = 5040

Suppose that five ninth graders and five tenth graders are in the club. How many ways can the officers be elected if the president is a tenth grader?

> 5 x 9 x 8 x 7 = 2520

Suppose that five ninth graders and five tenth graders are in the club. How many ways can the officers be elected if the president is a tenth grader and the vice-president is a ninth grader?

> 5 x 5 x 8 x 7 = 1400













