# Counting 9.4

## **<ins>R-permutations:</ins>** A sequence of r items with no repetitions, all taken from the same set.

Ex: Consider the set X = {John, Paul, George, Ringo}. The sequences (Paul, Ringo, John) and (John, George, Paul) are both examples of 3 perutations over X. In a sequence, order matters so the sequence (Paul, Ringo, John) is different from the sequence (Ringo, Paul, John).

### Fact 9.4.1: The number of r-permutations from a set of n elements.

Let r and n be positive integers with r <= n. The number of r-permutations from a set with n elements is denoted by P(n,r).

- P(n,r) = n! / (n-r)!

- n = the size of the larger set (the total number of items you can choose from).

- r = the number of positions you are arranging (how many items you actually pick and order).

A manager has five different jobs that need to get done on a given day. The manager has eight employees whom she can assign to the jobs. A job only requires one employee, and no employee can be assigned more than one job. How many possible ways can the manager do the assignment?

Order the jobs arbitrarily so that one job is first, one is second, etc. An assignment is a 5-permutation from the set of eight employees. The first employee gets the first job, the second employee gets the second job,..., the fifth employee gets the fifth job. The 
5-permutation looks like:

> The number of 5-perumations from a set of 8 employees is P(8,5) = 8 x 7 x 6 x 5 x 4 = 6720
> (Also can be done by using generalized product rule).

Three dice are thrown: one red, one blue, and one green. Each die has six possible outcomes. How many outcomes are possible in which the three dice all show different numbers?

> A set of 6 numbers and a set of 3 colors is P(6,3)
> 6 x 5 x 4 = 120

There are five computers and three students. How many ways are there for the students to sit at the computers if no computer has more than one student and each student is seated at a computer?

> A set of 3 students and 5 computers. P(5,3)
> 5 x 4 x 3 = 60

A class has ten students. A teacher gives out three prizes: One student gets a gift card, one gets a book, and one gets a movie ticket. No student can receive more than one prize. How many ways can the teacher distribute the prizes?

> A set of ten students and a set of 3 prizes. P(10,3)
> 10 x 9 x 8 = 720

### Fact 9.4.2: The number of permutations from a finite set.

The number of permutations of a finite set with n elements is P(n,n) = n x (n - 1) x ... x 2 x 1 = n!

A wedding party consisting of a bride, a groom, two bridesmaids, and two groomsmen line up for a photo. How many ways can the wedding party line up?

> P(6,6) or 6! = 6 x 5 x 4 x 3 x 2 x 1 = 720

A wedding party consisting of a bride, a groom, two bridesmaids, and two groomsmen line up for a photo. How many ways can the wedding party line up so that the bride is next to the groom?

> Bride and groom or Groom and bride = 2 possibilites and 4 other possibilities 
> The bride and groom = are combined together for one term.
> (!5) * 2 = 240

















