# Counting 9.5

## **<ins>R-subset:</ins>** Sometimes refered to as a r combination. It is a subset of size r

# Counting the number of ways to elect the three representatives is the same as counting the number of different 3 subsets of students from a class of size 20

The term combination in counting is just another word for subset.

Regular parens (b,a) means the order matters and order matters in permutations not subsets {a,b}.

S = {a,b,c}

## How many 2 permutations from S are there: (You have a set of n distinct items and you want to select r items from it)

> P(n,r) n! / (n-r)! = 3! / 1! = 6

## How many different 2-subsets from S are there?

> {a,b} {a,c} {b,c} = 3

## How many permutations map to the selection {orange, blue, pink}

> 3! ways
> orange, blue, pink
> orange, pink, blue
> blue, orange, pink
> blue, pink, orange
> pink, orange, blue
> pink, blue, orange
>
> 6 permutations map to one 3 subset {orange, blue, pink}

## There are P(n,r) r- permutations from set S = {1, 2, ..., n}

!r- permutations map to each r-subset from S

<h2><ins>Combinations</ins> (AKA r subsets)</h2>
<p>
Number of r-subsets from (n choose r):<br>
S = <span style="font-size:1.2em;">n!</span> / 
(<span style="font-size:1.2em;">r!</span> &times; (<span style="font-size:1.2em;">n - r</span>)!)
</p>



Number of r-subsets from \((n / r)\) =  \( S = \dfrac{n!}{r!(n - r)!} \)

- n! = factorial of the number of items

- r! = factorial of chosen items

- (n-r)! = factorial of remaining items


## Practice (Write it out)

1. Calculate numerical value for (7 3) = 7! / 3!(4!) = 7 x 6 x 5 x 4 x 3 x 2 x 1 / (3 x 2 x 1) (4 x 3 x 2 x 1)

> = 840/24 = 35

2. Calculate numerical value for (7 4)  

> 210/ 6 = 35

3. Calculate the numerical value for (100 1), the number of ways to select a subset of size 1 from a set of size 100

> 100! / 1!(99!) = 100 / 1 = 100

4. Calculate numerical value for (100 100). Note: 0! = 1.

> 100! / 100!(0!) = 100! / 100! = 1



5. A teacher must select four members of the math club to participate in an upcoming competition. How many ways are there for the teacher to select the members if the club has 12
 members? (Order does not matter = r subset)

 > 12! / 4! (8!) do top first we get 12 x 11 x 10 x 9 x 8! / 4! 8! we can cancle the 8! solving the rest we get 495.

 6. A file will be replicated on 3 different computers in a distributed newtwork of 15 computers. How many ways are there to select the locations for the file? (Order does not matter = r subset)

 > 15 x 14 x 13 / 3! = 455

 7. A university is organizing a team for a computer science competition. There are 33 graduate students and 34 undergraduate students to choose from. The organizers want the team to have 11 graduates and 5 undergraduates. One of the graduate students must be selected as leader.

 
$$
33 \times {32 \choose 10} \times {32 \choose 10}
$$




 ### Practice 9.5.1 

 https://learn.zybooks.com/zybook/COLOSTATECS220DaviesFall2025/chapter/9/section/5













